


Limiting BEEP no reply attack                        F. Brosnan Blazquez
                                      Advanced Software Production Line,
                                                                    S.L.
                                                          March 19, 2009


                     Limiting BEEP no reply attack

Abstract

   This document describes two features for the BEEP [RFC3080] protocol
   to allow peers to negotiate and control reply time limit for a
   channel and to enable a BEEP peer to not require all replies to be
   received to proceed with channel or session close with the intention
   to limit BEEP no reply attacks.


Table of Contents

   1.  Requirements notation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
   2.  Security motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
   3.  Points were a BEEP session may be blocked . . . . . . . . . . . 2
   4.  Features proposed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
     4.1.  Imposing limits to remote BEEP replies: "reply-limit" . . . 3
       4.1.1.  Disabling "reply-limit" on channel 0  . . . . . . . . . 5
       4.1.2.  Activating "reply-limit" feature for user channels  . . 5
       4.1.3.  Measures for "reply-limit" exceeded . . . . . . . . . . 5
     4.2.  Enabling no reply interactions: "no-reply"  . . . . . . . . 6
       4.2.1.  How applies "no-reply" feature to channel 0 . . . . . . 7
       4.2.2.  Activating "no-reply" feature . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
     4.3.  How "no-reply" and "reply-limit" relate to each other?  . . 7
     4.4.  Does "reply-limit" protect against permanent negative
           close?  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   5.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
     5.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
     5.2.  No normative references . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8














Brosnan Blazquez                                                [Page 1]

BEEP close limit      Limiting BEEP no reply attack           March 2009


1.  Requirements notation

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].


2.  Security motivation

   Experience with BEEP development shows that its session close
   (described at [RFC3080], section 2.3.1.3) provides many interesting
   features, not found in other protocols, like:

   1.  Providing a way to ensure all content is flushed in both
       directions, for all channels, before closing the session.

   2.  The hability to deny a channel or session close, for both peers.

   However, these features may be used by malicious software to setup an
   attack based on connecting and then blocking replies causing a BEEP
   listener to not be able to close a session unless it closes the
   transport layer (and even in that case, it is not a complete
   solution).  I call this BEEP no reply attack.

   This document identifies these points and provides two features that
   allows a BEEP peer to ask or advise it will implement a reply limit
   and a no reply check during the BEEP session.


3.  Points were a BEEP session may be blocked

   The list of blocking points that may be used to lock a BEEP session
   is, setting up a BEEP no reply attack:

   1.  To not reply to a channel start request.  Though this may not be
       a big deal in request/response escenarios where a listener is the
       only party that may block a channel start request, this problem
       becomes more apparent when BEEP is used in a full peer to peer
       environment where not only the listener but the initiator accepts
       channels to be started.  Additionally, not replying to a start
       request causes all subsequent start or close request to be not
       handled until previous reply is sent.

   2.  To not reply to messages received (MSG).  In BEEP, any message
       received (MSG) must be replied (RPY, ERR, ANS..NUL).  Not
       replying causes the remote BEEP peer to "understand" there are
       pending replies, making impossible to close a BEEP session until
       these replies are received.  In general there are no restriction



Brosnan Blazquez                                                [Page 2]

BEEP close limit      Limiting BEEP no reply attack           March 2009


       in BEEP to require a reply to every MSG received.  It is only
       required at the close session because all replies (in both
       directions) must be received so the close process can continue.

   3.  To not reply to channel or session close request.  Due to BEEP
       definition, any peer may reply at any time to a channel or
       session close request.  That is, a BEEP peer have no time limit
       imposed to reply (with a negative or afirmative value) to such
       close request.

   In the following sections are presented two features and how they are
   used to solve BEEP no reply attack (BNRA).


4.  Features proposed

   This document proposes the following two features:

   1.  reply-limit: This feature controls, in seconds, how long a reply
       can be delayed until a BEEP peer considers a protocol violation
       so he can close the session.

   2.  no-reply: This feature controls if a BEEP peer will wait for
       pending replies.  This affects the close session phase, making it
       more lightweight (from the perspective of requirements to meet)
       and also improves BEEP protocol by allowing a better fit for one-
       way notifications (via MSG frame).  As a side effect, it also
       reduces bandwidth consuption by removing those empty RPY usually
       required.

4.1.  Imposing limits to remote BEEP replies: "reply-limit"

   A BEEP peer may use "reply-limit" feature to limit allowed time under
   which a reply on a particular channel must take place to avoid a
   protocol violation.

   This is specially useful for channel 0, the BEEP session management
   channel, to ensure BEEP peers are bounded to a time limit to reply to
   channel start and channel close requests.

   The idea is to allow system administrators that runs BEEP services to
   have control over such delay/timeout.

   To enable "reply-limit" feature a BEEP peer must acknoledge it on
   session greetings phase as follow:






Brosnan Blazquez                                                [Page 3]

BEEP close limit      Limiting BEEP no reply attack           March 2009


      L: <wait for incoming connection>
      I: <open connection>
      L: RPY 0 0 . 0 145
      L: Content-Type: application/beep+xml
      L:
      L: <greeting features="reply-limit=10 no-reply">
      L:    <profile uri="http://iana.org/beep/TLS" />
      L: </greeting>
      L: END
      I: RPY 0 0 . 0 78
      I: Content-Type: application/beep+xml
      I:
      I: <greeting features="reply-limit=10" />
      I: END

                                 Figure 1

   A BEEP peer acting in the listener role (L:) receives a connection
   and sends along with all profiles supported and other features, the
   "reply-limit" feature with the maximum limit allowed in seconds to
   reply on channel 0.

   In this case, the BEEP peer acting as listener sent the following
   relevant information from previous example:

     L: <greeting features="reply-limit=10 no-reply">

   The example also shows how it is advised no-reply feature support.
   This is later used to explain "no-reply" feature.

   Requesting "reply-limit" feature on greetings have two purposes:

   1.  To ask remote BEEP peer to acknoledge its support for "reply-
       limit" feature...

   2.  ...and to provide the "reply-limit" for channel 0 which is
       implicitly created during BEEP session setup.  Since "reply-
       limit" is activated on channel start, it is required to provide
       this initial value in the case channel 0 must be configured.

   A BEEP peer asking for "reply-limit" support that receives a
   greetings reply without such feature MAY close the connection (and
   should log a diagnostic error).

   A BEEP listener peer asking for "reply-limit" must implicitly
   activate the timeout counter to close the session if no greetings
   reply is received within the limit reported.  The intention is to
   also limit half opened BEEP sessions with "reply-limit" activated for



Brosnan Blazquez                                                [Page 4]

BEEP close limit      Limiting BEEP no reply attack           March 2009


   channel 0.

   The same applies to tuning operations where a new greetings must be
   exchanged after transport negotiation (like TLS profile).

4.1.1.  Disabling "reply-limit" on channel 0

   If the listener does not want to impose a reply limit on channel 0,
   but needs reply limit support for other profiles it must just
   acknoledge "reply-limit" feature without any time configuration as
   follows:

     L: <greeting features="reply-limit">

4.1.2.  Activating "reply-limit" feature for user channels

   Once both BEEP peers have acknoledge its support for "reply-limit"
   any peer MAY request a channel start with a reply limit doing as
   follow:

     I: MSG 0 1 . 78 130
     I: Content-Type: application/beep+xml
     I:
     I: <start number="1" reply-limit="5">
     I:    <profile uri="urn:aspl.es:profiles:example"/>
     I: </start>

   A BEEP peer receiving a channel start request with a "reply-limit"
   configuration must accept or deny channel creation accepting such
   limit.

   In the case the profile can be served but not ensure "reply-limit"
   asked then the BEEP peer receving the request must deny channel start
   reporting such error:

     L: ERR 0 1 . 136 132
     L: Content-Type: application/beep+xml
     L:
     L: <error code="554">Unable to provide resource requested with
        "reply-limit" configured</error>
     L: END

4.1.3.  Measures for "reply-limit" exceeded

   A opened channel with a "reply-limit" configured that has exceeded
   reply time limit will mean a protocol violation.  The BEEP session
   will be terminated without generating a response and it is
   recommended that a diagnostic entry be logged.



Brosnan Blazquez                                                [Page 5]

BEEP close limit      Limiting BEEP no reply attack           March 2009


   The same applies to channel 0, in the case "reply-limit" was
   activated.  If a channel start or channel close request is issued but
   no reply is received within the limit configured, will mean a
   protocol violation and the BEEP session must be closed without
   generating a response.

   Especial mention to half opened connections where even no greetings
   reply is received.  In such case, the connection must be closed if
   reply time notified is exceeded.

4.2.  Enabling no reply interactions: "no-reply"

   Problem presented in this section comes from the fact that a set (or
   the last) MSG issued were not replied causing the channel or session
   close to wait forever until such reply is received.

   The problem may be resolved, in some situations, by adding a new BEEP
   frame type NFN, as proposed by David Kramer [david_nfn].  That would
   allow placing notifications, like MSG frame, but without requiring a
   reply.  However, this do not solve the problem on escenarios where a
   request/response pattern is being implemented (where an additional
   effort is required to correlate query and responses).

   The feature proposed "no-reply" will allow BEEP peers to notify that
   they will support creating channel where replies to MSG frame will be
   not required.  This has the following main implications:

   1.  BEEP peers will still be able to reply to MSG frames.

   2.  BEEP peers during close channel phase, for a channel with "no-
       reply" activated, will no require replies to be up to date, that
       is, replies to outstanding MSG and replies to received MSG
       frames.

   The intention behind "no-reply" feature is:

   1.  To provide a security feature that would protect BEEP servers
       that must run profiles that perform server-to-client
       notifications.  Because the listener issues a MSG frame to the
       client, it must be replied to close the session cleanly.  This
       leaves great power to the client side to harm the server by
       simply not replying.

   2.  To enhance BEEP interaction by providing a way to perform one-way
       message notification, because no reply will be required to MSG
       frame that is sent on a channel with "no-reply" activated.





Brosnan Blazquez                                                [Page 6]

BEEP close limit      Limiting BEEP no reply attack           March 2009


4.2.1.  How applies "no-reply" feature to channel 0

   The "no-reply" feature can't be used for channel 0.

   "no-reply" feature is only available for application profiles.  This
   feature should also be available for profiles already defined like
   TLS or SASL, allowing to implement a non-blocking close even in cases
   where there are pending replies.

4.2.2.  Activating "no-reply" feature

   Once both BEEP peers have announced its support for "no-reply"
   feature, at the greetings phase (Section 4.1), the feature is
   activated on channel start as follows:

     I: MSG 0 1 . 78 130
     I: Content-Type: application/beep+xml
     I:
     I: <start number="1" no-reply="true">
     I:    <profile uri="urn:aspl.es:profiles:example"/>
     I: </start>
     I: END

   If the remote BEEP peer accepts the channel to be created, "no-reply"
   behaviour will be assumed for both parties.  In the case "no-reply"
   is not allowed for the profile requested, remote BEEP peer must deny
   channel creation, replying:

     L: ERR 0 1 . 136 129
     L: Content-Type: application/beep+xml
     L:
     L: <error code="554">Unable to provide resource requested with
        "no-reply" configured</error>
     L: END

4.3.  How "no-reply" and "reply-limit" relate to each other?

   "no-reply" is a BEEP feature that provides security functions (to
   allow closing a channel without being blocked by pending replies) and
   application protocol functions (to allow performing one way message
   notifications).

   This means that "no-reply" feature can be used in a trusted
   environment withtout having security in mind but only creating an
   application protocol that do not have to reply to each MSG received.

   In the other hand "reply-limit" have the only intention to restrict
   the time within exchanges take place, especially over the channel 0,



Brosnan Blazquez                                                [Page 7]

BEEP close limit      Limiting BEEP no reply attack           March 2009


   so malicious usage can be limited.

   "reply-limit" makes it possible to take the decision to close a
   session if the remote BEEP do not reply within the negotiated
   interval.

4.4.  Does "reply-limit" protect against permanent negative close?

   A kind of attack easy to setup is to always deny all channel (or
   session) close requests received, making impossible to close a BEEP
   session.

   The easy countermeasure is to close the transport in the case a BEEP
   peer insist in deny closing a session for some tries.

   However this is not enough because, without "reply-limit" feature, a
   BEEP peer is allowed to not reply to a close request received.  That
   is, a bad BEEP peer simply have to not reply to a close request to
   avoid its connection to get closed.

   By using "reply-limit" feature, a BEEP is sure to receive a reply
   within period negotiated, allowing to take a decision either because
   a protocol violation due to time exceeded or because too much
   negative replies received.


5.  References

5.1.  Normative References

   [RFC3080]  Rose, M., "The Blocks Extensible Exchange Protocol Core",
              RFC 3080, March 2001.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

5.2.  No normative references

   [david_nfn]
              "Discussion about async channels for BEEP", 11 2008, <http
              ://groups.google.com/group/beepwg/msg/3aeaaa624aea592c>.










Brosnan Blazquez                                                [Page 8]

BEEP close limit      Limiting BEEP no reply attack           March 2009


Author's Address

   Francis Brosnan Blazquez
   Advanced Software Production Line, S.L.
   C/ Antonio Suarez No10, Edificio Alius A, Despacho 102
   Alcala de Henares, Madrid  28802
   Madrid

   Phone: 00 34 91 134 14 22
   Email: francis@aspl.es
   URI:   http://www.aspl.es








































Brosnan Blazquez                                                [Page 9]

